NARRATIVE 


OF  THE 


LIFE AND TRAVELS 


OF 


MRS.  NANCY  PRINCE. 


WRITTEN BY HERSELF. 

PUBLISHED   BY  THE 

AUTHOR. 

1853. 


WM. A. HALL, PRINTER, 22 SCHOOL ST., BOSTON. 


PREFACE. 

By divine aid, I attempt a second edition 
of my narrative, with the additions suggest- 
ed to me by my friends. My object is not a 
vain desire to appear before the public; but, 
by the sale, I hope to obtain the means to 
supply my necessities. There are many 
benevolent societies for the support of 
Widows, but I am desirous not to avail 
myself of them, so long as I can support 
myself by my own endeavors. Infirmities 
are coming upon me, which induce me to 
solicit the patronage of my friends and the 
public, in the sale of this work. Not wish- 
ing to throw myself on them, I take this 
method to help myself, as health and 
strength are gone. 


CONTENTS. 


A Sketch of the Early Life of Nancy Prince, 5 

Marriage, and Voyage to Russia, 20 

Mr. Prince, 22 

Manners and Customs of the Russians, 23 

The Events that took place during Nine Years' 

residence in St. Petersburg, 26 

Her Voyage Home, 40 

Her Voyage and Business to the West Indies,. . . .44 

Her Erand Home, and Success, 55 

Her Return Back, and State of Things at that 

Time, 57 

Description of the Country, 64 

Embarkment again Home, and Deception of the 

Captain, 74 

Cast away at Key West, 75 

Arrival at New  Orleans, — Scenes  witnessed 

while there, 76 

Departure from New Orleans, and arrival at New 

York, 79 


NARRATIVE. 


I was born in Newburyport, September the 
15th, 1799. My mother was born in Gloucester, 
Massachusetts — the daughter of Tobias Worn- 
toh, or Backus, so called. He was stolen from 
Africa, when a lad, and was a slave of Captain 
Winthrop Sargent; but, although a slave, he 
fought for liberty. He was in the Revolutionary 
army, and at the battle of Bunker Hill. He 
often used to tell us, when little children, the 
evils of Slavery, and how he was stolen from his 
native land. My grandmother was an Indian of 
this country; she became a captive to the Eng- 
glish, or their descendants. She served as a 
domestic in the Parsons family. My father, 
Thomas Gardner, was born in Nantucket; his 
parents were of African descent. He died in 
Newburyport, when I was three months old. My 
mother was thus a second time left a widow, with 

 
6 NARRATIVE  OF 

her two children, and she returned to Gloucester 
to her father.   My mother married her third hus- 
band, by whom she had six children.   My step- 
father was stolen  from Africa,  and while  the 
vessel was at anchor in one of our Eastern ports, 
he succeeded in making his escape from his cap- 
tors, by swimming ashore. I have  often heard 
him tell the tale. Having  some  knowledge of 
the  English  language, he  found  no trouble to 
pass.   There were two of them, and they found, 
from observation, that they were in a free State. 
I have  heard  my father describe the beautiful 
moon-light night when they two launched their 
bodies into the deep, for liberty.   When they got 
upon soundings, their feet were pricked with a 
sea-plant that grew under water, they had to re- 
treat, and, at last they reached the shore.  When 
day began to break, they laid down under a fence, 
as naked as they were born — soon they heard a 
rattling sound, and trembling, they looked to see 
what it meant.   In a few minutes, a man with a 
broad-brimed hat on, looked over the  fence  and 
cried out, " Halloo boys ! you are from that ship 
at anchor?"   Trembling, we answered, yes.   He 
kindly took us by the hand, and told us not to fear, 
for we were safe.   " Jump, boys," said he, " in- 
to my cart," which we  readily did.   He turned 
about, and soon entered a large yard — we were 


MRS.  PRINCE. 7 

taken to his house and carried to an apartment, 
where he brought us clothes and food, and cheer- 
ed us with every kindness. No search was made 
for us; it was supposed we were drowned, as 
many had jumped over-board on the voyage, 
thinking they could get home to Africa again. I 
have often heard my step-father boast how brave 
they were, and say they stood like men and saw 
the ship set sail with less than half they stole 
from Africa. He was selling his bamboo baskets, 
when he was seized by white men, and put in a 
boat, and taken on board the ship that lay off; 
many such ships there were ! He was called 
"Money Vose," and his name may be found on 
the Custom House books in Gloucester. His last 
voyage was with Captain Elias Davis, in the brig 
Romulus, belonging to Captain Filz William Sar- 
gent, in whose employ he had been twelve years. 
During the war, the brig was taken by a British 
privateer, and he was pressed into their service. 
He was sick with the dropsy a long while, and 
died oppressed, in the English dominions. My 
mother was again left a widow, with an infant 
six weeks old, and seven other children. When 
she heard of her husband's death, she exclaimed, 
"I thought it; what shall I do with these children?" 
She was young, inexperienced, with no hope in God, 
and without the knowledge of her Saviour.   Her 


8 NARRATIVE  OF 

grief, poverty, and responsibilities, were too much 
for her; she never again was the mother that 
she had been before. I was, at this time, in 
Captain F. W. Sargent's family. I shall never 
forget the feelings I experienced, on hearing of 
the decease of my father-in-law, although he was 
not kind to me or my sister; but, by industry a 
humble home was provided, for my mother and 
her younger children. Death had twice visited 
our family, in less than three months. My grand- 
father died before my father-in-law sailed. I 
thought I would go home a little while, and try 
and comfort my mother. The three oldest chil- 
dren were put into families. 

My brother and myself stayed at home that 
Summer. We gathered berries and sold them in 
Gloucester; strawberries, raspberries, blackber- 
ries and whortleberries, were in abundance, in 
the stony environs, growing spontaneously. With 
the sale of these fruits, my brother and myself 
nearly supported my mother and her children, that 
Summer. My brother George, young as he was, 
caught fish and sold them, and run of errands, 
and was always watching for something to do, 
that he might help his mother. At one time he 
was missing; we expected he was drowned; a 
search was made for him in the water; the neigh- 
bors were all on the alert.   Poor mother return- 


MRS.  PRINCE. 9 

ing from a hard day's work, supposing the boy 
was lost, was like a lunatic. The lad was sup- 
posed to have fallen from the wharf, where he 
was fishing. Our friends had all given up the 
search — it was then eleven o'clock at night. 
Mother and I locked up the children and went 
round to the harbor, to one Captain Warner, who 
traded to the Eastward. Mrs. Warner informed 
us that my brother came there in the morning, 
with his bundle, and they supposed he was sent, 
as the Captain wished to take him with him. He 
went on board, and the vessel sailed that after- 
noon. In three weeks, he came home, to the 
comfort of his mother and all of us. He brought 
back, for his pay, four feet of wood and three 
dollars. 

We stayed with our mother until every re- 
source was exhausted; we then heard of a place 
eight miles out of town, where a boy and girl 
were wanted. We both went and were engaged. 
We often went home with our wages, and all the 
comforts we could get; but we could not ap- 
proach our mother as we wished. God in mercy 
took one little boy of seven years, who had been 
in a consumption one year. 

My oldest sister, Silvia, was seventy miles in 
the country, with the family that brought her up; 
so we were scattered all about.   Soon as the war 


10 NARRATIVE OF

was over, I determined to get more for my labor. 
I left Essex and went to Salem., in the month of 
April, 1814, without a friend, without a guide. 
I first went to Gloucester, to bid my mother and 
the family adieu. George, my brother, I left 
with a promise to send for him when I should be 
settled. When I reached the Cove, about five 
miles from Gloucester, I stopped at a friend's, 
who urged me not to go, holding up obstacles. It 
rained and snowed, but I travelled along, follow- 
ing the guide-posts, until I reached Beverly bridge, 
I crossed it when the clock struck four, in the 
afternoon. I now wished to find a friend in 
Becket Street, Salem, but was afraid of the peo- 
ple that I met near the Bridge, they were so 
covered with rags and dirt. I kept on until I 
reached the Common; I then asked a woman who 
was neatly dressed, for the lady I wished to find. 
She did not know. I asked for another person, 
that I knew was not very good; she took me 
there, but I soon found my friend that I wished, 
and stopped there two weeks, and then went to 
live with a respectable colored family. My 
mother was not satisfied, and came after me. I 
would not go to Gloucester. She left me at a 
friend's, and this woman had a daughter, who 
came home from service, sick. I took her place, 
and thought myself fortunate to be with religious 


MRS. PRINCE. 11 

people, as I had enjoyed the happy privilege of 
religious instruction. My dear grandfather was a 
member of a Congregational Church, and a good 
man; he always attended meeting in the morning, 
and took his children with him. In the afternoon 
he took care of the smaller children, while my 
mother attended with her little group. He thought 
it was wrong for us to go to school where the 
teacher was not devoted to God. Thus I early 
knew the difference between right and wrong. 

There were seven in the family, one sick with 
a fever, and another in a consumption; and of 
course, the work must have been very severe, 
especially the washings. Sabbath evening I had 
to prepare for the wash; soap the clothes and put 
them into the steamer, set the kettle of water to 
boiling, and then close in the steam, and let the 
pipe from the boiler into the steam box that held 
the clothes. At two o'clock, on the morning of 
Monday, the bell was rung for me to get up; but, 
that was not all, they said I was too slow, and the 
washing was not done well; I had to leave the 
tub to tend the door and wait on the family, and 
was not spoken kind to, at that. 

Hard labor and unkindness was too much for 
me; in three months, my health and strength were 
gone. I often looked at my employers, and 
thought to myself, is this your religion?   I did 


12 NARRATIVE OF 

not wonder that the girl who had lived there pre- 
vious to myself, went home to die. They had 
family prayers, morning and evening. Oh! yes, 
they were sanctimonious! I was a poor stranger, 
but fourteen years of age, imposed upon by these 
good people; but I must leave them. In the 
year 1814, they sent me to Gloucester in their 
chaise. I found my poor mother in bad health, 
and I was sick also; but, by the mercy of God, 
and the attention and skill of Dr. Dale, and the 
kindness of friends, I was restored, so that in a 
few months, I was able again to go to work, 
although my side afflicted me, which I attributed 
to overworking myself. 

In the Spring of 1815, I returned lo Salem, 
accompanied by my eldest sister, and we obtained 
good places. She took it into her head to go to 
Boston, as a nursery girl, where she lived a few 
months and was then deluded away. February 
7th, 1816, a friend came to Salem and informed 
me of it. To have heard of her death, would 
not have been so painful to me, as we loved each 
other very much, and more particularly, as our 
step-father was not very kind to us. When little 
girls, she used to cry about it, and we used to 
say, when we were large enough we would go 
away. 

It was very cold; but notwithstanding, I was so 


MRS.  PRINCE. 13 

distressed about my sister that I started the next 
morning for Boston, on foot. A friend was with 
me. At Lynn Hotel we refreshed ourselves, and 
all seemed much interested about me; two wo- 
men took me aside, and inquired how it was that I 
was with that woman. I told my reason; she 
was well known all about; she lived as a cook 
in Boston, she came after her son, a little child 
whom she held in her arms. By the time we 
were seven miles from Salem, cold and fatigued, 
I could walk no farther, and we hired a horse 
and sleigh, and a man to drive us to Boston, 
where we arrived at seven o'clock in the even- 
ing. The house where we stopped was in Green 
street, the lady kindly invited me to stop; I refus- 
ed; I was suspicious the house was not good; the 
woman I came with took me to Belknap street, 
where I found an old friend; I would not stop, 
they went with me to Bedford street, where I in- 
tended to put up. The inmates received me very 
kindly; my feet, hands and ears were all frost- 
bitten. I needed all the hospitality that was ex- 
tended to me. I was young and inexperienced, 
but God knew that my object was good. "In 
wisdom he chooses the weak things of the earth." 
Without his aid, how could I ever have rescued 
my lost sister? Mr. Brown, when he learned my 
errand, kindly offered to assist me. He found 
where my sister resided, and taking with him a 

14 NARRATIVE  OF 

large cane, he accompanied me to the house, on 
Sabbath evening. My sister I found seated with 
a number of others round a fire, the mother of 
harlots at the head. My sister did not see me 
until I clasped her round the neck. The old 
woman flew at me, and bid me take my hands 
off of her; she opened a door that led down 
into a cellar kitchen, and told me to come 
down, she attempted to take my hands off of 
my sister. Mr. Brown defended me with his 
cane; there were many men and girls there, 
and all was confusion. When my sister came to 
herself, she looked upon me and said: "Nancy, 
O Nancy, I am ruined!" I said, " Silvia, my 
dear sister, what are you here for? Will you 
not go with me?" She seemed thankful to get 
away; the enraged old woman cried out, " she 
owes me, she cannot go." Silvia replied, "I will 
go." The old woman seized her to drag her 
down into the kitchen; I held on to her, while 
Mr. Brown at my side, used his great cane; he 
threatened her so that she was obliged to let my 
sister go, who, after collecting her things, ac- 
companied Mr. Brown and myself. 

Now while I write, I am near the spot that 
that was then the hold of all foul and unclean things. 
"The lips of a strange woman drop as an honey 
comb, and her mouth is smoother than oil; there 
she has slain her thousands; her end is bitter as 


MRS.  PRINCE. 15 

wormwood, sharp as a two-edged sword, and lieth 
in wait at every corner, with an impudent face, 
saying, I have peace offerings, I have payed my 
vows. With her much fair speech, she flattereth: 
she hath cast down many wounded, yea, many 
strong have been slain by her; her house is the 
way to hell going down to the chambers of death." 
Even now, I cannot refrain my feelings, although 
death has long separated us; but her soul is pre- 
cious; she was very dear to me; she was five 
years older than myself, and often protected me 
from the blows of an unkind step-father. She 
often said she was not fit to live, nor fit to die. 

The next day, after breakfast, one of Mrs. 
Brown's daughters accompanied us to the stage 
office; we expected Mr. Low, the driver of the 
Gloucester stage, who knew us as his towns-peo- 
ple, would let us lake passage with him without 
any difficulty; but he refused unless we would 
ride upon the top. It was very cold; I had sent 
my mother my wages the week before, and what 
money I had, I had taken in advance, of my em- 
ployers. We were greatly embarrassed, when a 
colored man, unknown to us, penetrated our diffi- 
culty, and asked us if we had two dollars; we 
told him we had; he very kindly took us to the 
stage office, and we bargained for a horse and 
sleigh to carry us to Salem, where we  arrived 


16 NARRATIVE  OF 

safely in about two hours and a half; and we 
gave up our conveyance to the same owners, with 
ten thousand thanks to our colored friend, and to 
our Heavenly Father; had we attempted to walk, 
we must have frozen by the way. The horse 
and sleigh belonged to the stage-office, so we had 
no more care for that. The man who let it to 
us was very humane, although a stranger. The 
price was two dollars, of which he not only gave 
us back fifty cents to pay our toll, but went with 
us as far as to Charlestown bridge. 

I often thought of the contrast between our 
townsman, Mr. Low, and the stranger who was 
so kind to us. The lady I lived with, Mrs. John 
Deland, received us very kindly, and permitted 
my sister to remain with me awhile; then she 
returned to Gloucester, to the family who brought 
her up, and I thought we had gained a great vic- 
tory. 

My brother George and myself were very de- 
sirous to make our mother comfortable: he went 
to sea for that purpose; the next April, I came 
to Boston to get a higher price for my labor; for 
we had agreed to support my mother, and hoped 
she would take home our little brother and take 
care of him, who was supported by the town. 
George came home, and sailed again in the same 
employ, leaving mother a draw bill for half his 
wages.   My sister returned to Boston to find me, 


MKS.  PRINCE 17 

and wished to procure a place to work out. I 
had just changed my place for one more retired, 
and engaged my sister with me as a chamber 
maid; she tried me much. I thought it a needy 
time, for I had not yielded my heart to the will 
of God, though I had many impressions, and 
formed many resolutions; but the situations that 
I had been placed in, (having left my mother's 
house at the age of eight,) had not permitted me 
to do as I wished, although the kind counsels of 
my dear grandfather and pious teachers followed 
me wherever I went. Care after care oppressed 
me — my mother wandered about like a Jew — 
the young children who were in families were 
dissatisfied; all hope but in God was lost. I re- 
solved, in my mind, to seek an interest in my 
Savior, and put my trust in Him; and never shall 
I forget the place or time when God spake to my 
troubled conscience. Justified by faith I found 
peace with God, the forgiveness of sin through 
Jesus Christ my Lord. After living sixteen years 
without hope, and without a guide. May 6th, 1819, 
the Rev. Thomas Paul, baptized myself, and seven 
others, in obedience to the great command. 

We, on him our anchor cast — 
Poor and needy, lean on him, 
He will bring us through at last. 

The same day, we received the right hand of 

18 NARRATIVE  OF 

fellowship from our then beloved pastor. After 
the absence of nine years, I had the happy privi- 
lege of meeting with two of the number, who were 
unshaken in the faith; they have since gone to 
join the spirits in glory. I had the happy privi- 
lege of attending them in sickness. 

I now turn to the scenes of youth. George 
again returned home, and we again provided a 
home for mother and the little ones. He shipped 
in the same vessel again, and affairs now seemed 
to promise comfort and respectability; but moth- 
er chose to marry again; this was like death to 
us all. George returned home, but was so dis- 
appointed that he shipped again to return no 
more. Although a boy of sixteen, he was as 
steady as most men at twenty. My cares were 
consequently increased, having no one to share 
them with me. My next brother, who lived 
in South Essex, came to Salem to his mother's, 
but was driven away by her husband, and came 
to me; I carried him to Gloucester and left him 
in the hands of the town; he stayed but three 
weeks, and returned to me again; I then board- 
ed him out for one dollar a week, until I could 
procure suitable employment for him. When 
winter came, poor mother's health was declining. 
Little Samuel could do but little; my father-in- 
law was very cross, his disappointment was very 

MRS.  PRINCE 19 

great, for he expected to be supported by my 
brother George and myself. I could not see my 
mother suffer, therefore I left my place and went 
to Salem to watch over her and Samuel, and lived 
in the Rev. Dr. Bolle's family. In the Spring, I 
returned to Boston, and took my brother Samuel 
with me; soon after, my sister Lucy left her 
place and went to her mother, but was not 
permitted to stay; my mother wrote to me, re- 
questing me to take care of her. I then deter- 
mined, in my mind, to bring her to Boston, and 
if possible, procure a place for her; I then had 
Samuel and John on my hands; Lucy was not 
nine, and very small of her age, I could not easi- 
ly get her a place, but fortunately obtained board 
for her and Samuel for one dollar a week. My 
brother John, whom I had boarded, at last got a 
place where he had wages. Soon the Lord op- 
ened the way for little Samuel; Dr. Phelps took 
him to bring up: so that I was left with one 
only to sustain; soon my hopes were blasted. 
John left his place, and was several months on my 
hands again; finally, he made up his mind to go 
to sea; I was so thankful that he had concluded 
to do something, that I took two months' wages 
in advance to fit him out for Liverpool, in five 
months he returned without a single thing but the 
clothes he had on.  The ship brought passengers 


20 NARRATIVE OF 

from Ireland. As soon as the vessel arrived, he 
came to seek me; I went with him for his things; 
but passengers and all were gone. His wages 
were small, not enough to make him comfortable: 
and, had not a friend given him a home, he would 
again have been dependent on my exertions; 
another friend took Lucy, with whom she stayed 
eleven months. She lived in different families 
until she was about twelve years old; I then put 
her in the Rev. Mr. Mann's family, at Westmin- 
ster, for a certain time, thinking it would be best 
for her; and John I left to fight his own battles. 
My sister Silvia, was one of my greatest trials. 
Knowing she was in Boston, my mother, in one 
of her spells of insanity, got away from her 
home and travelled to Boston after her; she 
came where I lived, my employers were very 
kind to her, she tarried a few days, when I hired 
a horse and chaise and took them both back to 
Salem, and returned to my place in 1822, with a 
determination to do something for myself; I left 
my place after three months, and went to learn a 
trade; and after seven years of anxiety and toil, 
I made up my mind to leave my country. Sep- 
tember 1st, 1823, Mr. Prince arrived from Rus- 
sia. Februrary 15th, 1824, we were married. 
April 14th, we embarked on board the Romulus, 
captain  Epes  Sargent  commander, bound  for 


MRS.  PRINCE 21 

Russia. May 24th, arrived at Elsinore, left the 
same day for Copenhagen, where we remained 
twelve days. We visited the king's palace, and 
several other extensive and beautiful buildings. 
We attended a number of entertainments, among 
the Danes and English, who were religious; ob- 
served that their manners and customs were 
similar; they are attentive to strangers; the 
Sabbath is very strictly observed; the principal 
religion is Lutheran and Calvinistic, but all per- 
suasions are tolerated. The languages are Dutch, 
French and English. The Danes are very mod- 
est and kind, but like all other nations, they know 
how to take the advantage. We left Copenha- 
gen the 7th of June, and arrived at Cronstadt on 
the 19th; left there the 21st for St. Petersburg, 
and in a few hours, were happy to find ourselves 
at our place of destination, through the blessing 
of God, in good health, and soon made welcome 
from all quarters. We took lodgings with a Mrs. 
Robinson, a native of our country, who was Pa- 
tience Mott, of Providence, who left here in the 
year 1813, in the family of Alexander Gabriel, 
the man who was taken for Mr. Prince. There 
I spent six weeks very pleasantly, visiting and re- 
ceiving friends, in the manner of the country. 
While there I attended two of their parties; there 
were various amusements in which I did not par- 


22 NARRATIVE OF

take, which caused them much disappointment. 
I told them my religion did not allow of dancing 
or dice playing, which formed part of the amuse- 
ments. As they were very strict in their relig- 
ion, they indulged me in the same privilege. By 
the help of God I was ever enabled to preserve 
my stand. 

Mr. Prince was born in Marlborough, and lived 
in families in this city. In 1810 he went to 
Gloucester, and sailed with captain Theodore 
Stanwood, for Russia. He returned with him, 
and remained in his family, and at this time 
visited at my mother's. He sailed with cap- 
tain Stanwood in 1812, for the last time. The 
Captain took with him his son Theodore, in order 
to place him in School in St. Petersburg. When the 
Captain sailed for home, Mr. Prince went to serve 
the Princess Purtossof, one of the noble ladies of 
the Court. The palace where the imperial fam- 
ily reside is called the court, or the seat of Gov- 
ernment. This magnificent building is adorned 
with all the ornaments that possibly can be ex- 
plained; there are hundreds of people that inhabit 
it, besides the soldiers that guard it. There are 
several of these splendid edifices in the city and 
vicinity. The one that I was presented in, was 
in a village, three miles from the city. After 
leaving the carriage, we entered the first ward; 


MRS.  PRINCE 23 

where the usual salutation by the guards was per- 
formed. As we passed through the beautiful 
hall, a door was opened by two colored men in 
official dress. The Emperor Alexander, stood on 
his throne, in his royal apparel. The throne is 
circular, elevated two steps from the floor, and 
covered with scarlet velvet, tasseled with gold; 
as I entered, the Emperor stepped forward with 
great politeness and condescension, and wel- 
comed me, and asked several questions; he then 
accompanied us to the Empress Elizabeth; she 
stood in her dignity, and received me in the same 
manner the Emperor had. They presented me 
with a watch, &c. It was customary in those 
days, when any one married, belonging to the 
court, to present them with gifts, according to 
their standard; there was no prejudice against 
color; there were there all casts, and the people 
of all nations, each in their place. 

The number of colored men that filled this 
station was twenty; when one dies, the number 
is immediately made up. Mr. Prince filled the 
place of one that had died. They serve in turns, 
four at a time, except on some great occasions, 
when all are employed. Provision is made for 
the families within or without the palace. Those 
without go to court at 8 o'clock in the morning; 
after breakfasting, they take their station in the 


24 NARRATIVE  OF 

halls, for the purpose of opening the doors, at 
signal given, when the Emperor and Empress 
pass. 

First of August, we visited the burying-ground 
where the people meet, as they say, to pay re- 
spect to their dead. It is a great holiday; they 
drink and feast on the grave stones, or as near 
the grave as they can come; some groan and 
pray, and some have music and dancing. At a 
funeral no one attends except the invited; after 
the friends arrive, a dish of rice, boiled hard, with 
raisins, is handed round; all are to take a spoon- 
ful, with the same spoon, and out of the same 
dish; in the meanwhile the priest, with his clerk, 
performs the ceremony, perfuming the room with 
incense. The lid is not put on to the coffin, the 
corpse being laid out in his or her best dress. 
The torch-men (who are dressed in black gar- 
ments, made to slope down to their feet, with 
broad brimmed hats that cover their shoulders,) 
form a procession, with lighted torches in their 
hands, bowing their heads as they pass along very 
gravely; then comes one more with the lid on 
his head; then the hearse with the corpse drawn 
by four horses, covered with black gowns down 
to their feet; they all move along with great 
solemnity. Before entering the grave-yard, the 
procession goes to an adjoining church, where 


MRS.  PEINCE 25 

there are many ladies, placed on benches, side 
by side, according to their ages; the ladies 
dressed as if they were going to a ball-room, dis- 
playing a most dreadful appearance. Each one 
has her hands crossed, and holding in one of 
them a pass to give to Peter, that they may enter 
into Heaven. At this place they light their can- 
dles, and receive their rice in the manner be- 
fore mentioned. The top is then put on to the 
coffin, and the procession forms and repairs to 
the grave; the priest sanctifies the grave, then 
casts in dust, and the coffin is consigned to its 
narrow-house; then commence the yells; they 
drink, eat cake, black bread, and finish their 
rice, when the party return back to dinner, where 
every thing has been prepared during their ab- 
sence. This is the Greek mode of burying their 
dead. On the birth of a child, the babe is not 
dressed until it is baptized; it is immersed all over 
in water; a stand with an oval basin, is brought 
for the purpose by the clerk. The mother is pre- 
sented with gifts, which are placed under her 
pillow. Should the babe die before this rite is 
performed, it is not placed with the others; but 
should it die having been baptized, although not 
more than two hours old, it is dressed and placed 
on the bench at church with the rest. In this 
manner, the common people bury their dead. 

26 NARRATIVE  OF 

When any of the imperial family dies, they 
are laid in state forty days, and every thing 
accordingly. There is a building built expressly 
for the imperial families, where their remains are 
deposited. In the front part of it, the criminals 
that have rebelled against the imperial family are 
placed in cells, thus combining the prison and the 
tomb; and in sailing by, these miserable crea- 
tures are exposed to the careless gaze of unfeel- 
ing observers. 

St. Petersburg was inundated October 9th, 1824. 
The water rose sixteen feet in most parts of the 
city; many of the inhabitants were drowned. 
An island between the city and Cronstadt, con- 
taining five hundred inhabitants, was inundated, 
and all were drowned, and great damage was 
done at Cronstadt. The morning of this day was 
fair; there was a high wind. Mr. Prince went 
early to the palace, as it was his turn to serve; 
our children boarders were gone to school; our 
servant had gone of an errand. I heard a cry, 
and to my astonishment, when I looked out to 
see what was the matter, the waters covered the 
earth. I had not then learned the language, but 
I beckoned to the people to come in. The waters 
continued to rise until 10 o'clock, A. M. The 
waters were then within two inches of my win- 
dow, when they ebbed and  went out as fast as 


MRS.  PRINCE.  27 

they had come in, leaving to our view a dreadful 
sight. The people who came into my house for 
their safety retired, and I was left alone. At 
four o'clock in the afternoon, there was darkness 
that might be felt, such as I had never experi- 
enced before. My situation was the more painful, 
being alone, and not being able to speak. I 
waited until ten in the evening; I then took a 
lantern, and started to go to a neighbor's, whose 
children went to the same school with my board- 
ers. I made my way through a long yard, over 
the bodies of men and beasts, and when opposite 
their gate I sunk; I made one grasp, and the 
earth gave away; I grasped again, and fortu- 
nately got hold of the leg of a horse, that had 
been drowned. I drew myself up, covered with 
mire, and made my way a little further, when I 
was knocked down by striking against a boat, 
that had been washed up and left by the retiring 
waters; and as I had lost my lantern, I was 
obliged to grope my way as I could, and feeling 
along the walk, I at last found the door that I 
aimed at. My family were safe and they accom- 
panied me home. At 12 o'clock, Mr. Prince 
came home, as no one was permitted to leave the 
palace, till his majesty had viewed the city. In 
the morning the children and the girl returned, 
and I went to view the pit into which I had sunk. 

28 NARRATIVE  OF 

It was large enough to hold a dozen like myself, 

where the earth had caved in.  Had not the horse 
been there, I should never again have  seen the 
light of day, and no one would have known my 
fate.   Thus  through  the providence of God, I 
escaped from the flood and the pit. 

	My helper, God, I bless thy name; 
	The same thy power, thy grace the same; 
	I 'midst ten thousand dangers stand, 
	Supported by thy guardian hand." 

Should I attempt to give an account of all the 
holidays, it would fill volumes. The next to 
notice is Christmas and New Year. The first 
day of January a grand masquerade is given by 
his majesty, at the winter palace; forty thousand 
tickets are distributed; every thing is done in 
order; every gentleman wears a mask and cloak, 
and carries a lady with him. They are formed 
in a procession, and enter at the west gate; as 
they pass through, all the golden vessels and or- 
naments are displayed; these were back of a 
counter, which extends two hundred feet; there 
the company receive a cup of hot chocolate, and 
a paper of comfits, and a bun; a great many 
are in attendance, as a vast many persons are 
permitted to pass in and view the palace, and 
go out at the east gate. 

The 6th of January is a still greater day, for 
then the water is christened; a church is built on 

MRS.  PRINCE. 29 

the ice, ornamented with gold and evergreens, 
and a row of spruce trees, extending from the 
door of the palace to the church. At this time 
all the nobles, of different nations, make their 
appearance in their native costume. The Pa- 
triarch, Archbishops, and other dignitaries of the 
court, have a service; then they pass through 
and christen the water, and make it holy; then 
there is a great rush of the people for this holy 
water. On the plain an ice hill is built, eighty 
feet high, where the emperor and his court exer- 
cise themselves. 

Februrary 10th is another holiday. Buildings 
are constructed on the plain for the occasion. 
All kinds of amusements may be found here, and 
all kinds of animals seen; much time and money 
are spent. The buildings are built in rotation. 
All the children of the different seminaries and 
institutions of education, are driven round in 
gilded carriages to witness the performances. 
After this is the great Fast, previous to the cru- 
cifixion of our Saviour. Then Christ is repre- 
sented . as riding into Jerusalem; branches of 
trees are placed on the ice, and strewed through 
the streets, and every performance is carried 
out. The Saviour is made of white marble; he 
is crucified and buried, and on the third day he 
rises, according to the Scriptures; then the can- 
 
30 NARRATIVE  OF 

nons are fired. At the close of this forty day's 
Fast, they have a great feast and fair; all busi- 
ness is suspended, and the festivity and frolic 
continue for one week. 

The first day of May is another great holiday. 
The merchant's daughters are arranged on each 
side of a long mall, in the beautiful gardens, and 
arrayed in their best clothes, under the care of 
an old woman known in their families; the gen- 
tlemen walk round and observe them, and if they 
see one they fancy, they speak to the old woman; 
she takes him to the parents and introduces him; 
if the parties agree, they prepare for the be- 
trothal. It is their custom to marry one of their 
own station. All these holidays are accounted 
sacred. The first year I noted them all, as I 
was accustomed to attend them. 

May, 1825. 1 spent some time visiting the 
different towns in the vicinity of St. Petersburg. 
In the fall of the same year, the Emperor retired 
to a warmer climate for the health of the Empress 
Elizabeth. January, 1826, the corpse of Alex- 
ander was brought in state, and was met three 
miles from the city by the nobles of the court; 
and they formed a procession, and the body was 
brought in state into the building where the 
imperial family were deposited. March, of the 
same year, the corpse of Elizabeth was brought 

MRS.  PRINCE, 31 

in the same manner. Constantine was then king 
of Poland, he was next heir to the throne, and was, 
unanimously voted by the people, but refused 
and resigned the crown in favor of his brother 
Nicholas. The day appointed the people were 
ordered to assemble as usual, at the ringing of the 
bells; they rejected Nicholas; a sign was given 
by the leaders that was well understood, and the 
people great and small rushed to the square and 
cried with one voice for Constantine. The em- 
peror with his prime minister, and city governor, 
rode into the midst of them, entreating them to 
retire, without avail; they were obliged to order 
the cannons fired upon the mob; it was not known 
when they discharged them that the emperor 
and his ministers were in the crowd. He was 
wonderfully preserved, while both his friends and 
their horses were killed. There was a general 
seizing of all classes, who were taken into cus- 
tody. The scene cannot be described; the bod- 
ies of the killed and mangled were cast into 
the river, and the snow and ice were stained 
with the blood of human victims; as they were 
obliged to drive the cannon to and fro in the 
midst of the crowd, the bones of those wounded, 
whomight have been cured, were crushed. The 
cannon are very large, drawn by eight horses, 
trained for the purpose.   The scene was awful; 

32 NARRATIVE  OF 

all business was stopped. This deep plot origi- 
nated in 1814, in Germany, with the Russian 
nobility and German, under the pretence of a Free 
Mason's Lodge. When they returned home they 
increased their numbers and presented their chart 
to the emperor for permission, which was grant- 
ed. In the year 1822, the emperor being suspi- 
cious that all was not right, took their chart from 
them. They carried it on in small parties, rap- 
idly increasing, believing they would soon be 
able to destroy all the imperial branches, and 
have a republican government. Had not this 
taken place, undoubtedly they would at last have 
succeeded. So deep was the foundation of this 
plot laid, both males and females were engaged 
in it. The prison-houses were filled, and thirty 
of the leading men were put in solitary confine- 
ment, and twenty-six of the number died, four 
were burned. A stage was erected and faggots 
were placed underneath, each prisoner was se- 
cured by iron chains, presenting a most appalling 
sight to an eye-witness. A priest was in attend- 
ance to cheer their last dying moments, then fire 
was set to the faggots, and those brave men were 
consumed. Others received the knout, and even 
the princesses and ladies of rank were imprisoned 
and flogged in their own habitations. Those that 
survived their punishment were banished to Sibe- 

MRS.  PRINCE. 33 

ria. The mode of banishment is very imposing 
and very heart-rending, severing them from all 
dear relatives and friends, for they are never per- 
mitted to take their children. When they arrive 
at the gate of the city, their first sight is a guard 
of soldiers, then wagons with provisions, then the 
noblemen in their banished apparel guarded, then 
each side, conveyances for the females, then la- 
dies in order, guarded by soldiers. 

Preparations were now being made for the 
coronation of the new Emperor and Empress. 
This took place September, 1826, in Moscow, 
555 miles south-east from St. Petersburg. All 
persons engaged in the court were sent before- 
hand, in order to prepare for the coming event. 
After his majesty's laws were read, as usual on 
such occasions, those who wished to remain in 
his service did  so, and those who did not were 
discharged. 

After the coronation, the Emperor and his 
court returned to St. Petersburg. June, 1827, war 
was declared between Russia and Turkey. They 
had several battles, with varied success. The Rus- 
sians surrounded and laid siege to Constantinople. 
The Sultan of Turkey sued for peace, and a 
treaty was at last signed, and peace was pro- 
claimed in 1829. In March, of the same year, 
war was declared with Poland. 1831, The chol- 

34 NARRATIVE  OF 

era, that malignant disease, made its appearance 
in Austria, from thence to little Russia, making 
great ravages, thousands of people falling a prey. 
It then began to rage in St. Petersburg, carrying 
off 9255. This disease first appeared in Mada- 
gascar, 1814, where most of the inhabitants died. 
It is called the plague, that God sent among the 
people of Israel and other nations, for centuries 
back. Much might be said of this dreadful dis- 
ease and others that are but little known in this 
country. God often visits nations, families, and 
persons, with judgments as well as mercies. 

The present Emperor and Empress are cour- 
teous and affable. The Empress would often 
send for the ladies of the court at 8 oclock in the 
evening to sup with her: when they arrive at the 
court they form a procession and she takes the 
lead. On entering the hall, the band strikes up; 
there are two long tables on each side, and in the 
midst circular tables for the Imperial family. The 
tables are spread apparently with every variety 
of eatables and desserts, but everything is artificial, 
presenting a novel appearance. When the com- 
pany are seated, the Emperor and Empress walk 
around the tables and shake hands with each in- 
dividual, as they pass. The prisoners of war who 
are nobles, are seated by themselves with their 
faces veiled.   There is a tender or waiter to each 

MRS.  PRINCE. 35 

person, with two plates, one with soup and the 
other with something else. After a variety of 
courses, in one hour they are dismissed by the 
band. They then retire to another part of the 
palace to attend a ball or theatrical amusements. 
At the Empress' command they are dismissed. 
She carries power and dignity in her countenance, 
and is well adapted to her station. And after her 
late amusements at night, she would be out at an 
early hour in the morning, visiting the abodes of 
the distressed, dressed in as common apparel as 
any one here, either walking, or riding in a com- 
mon sleigh. At her return she would call for her 
children, to take them in her arms and talk to 
them. " She riseth while it is yet night and giv- 
eth meat to her household and a portion to her 
maidens, she stretcheth out her hands to the poor, 
yea, she reacheth out her hands to the needy; 
she is not afraid of the snow, for all her house- 
hold are clothed in scarlet." Then she would go 
to the cabinet of his Majesty; there she would 
write and advise with him. 

The Russian ladies follow the fashions of the 
French and English. Their religion is after the 
Greek Church. There are no seats in their 
churches; they stand, bow, and kneel, during the 
service. The principal church is on the Main 
street.   There are the statues of the great com- 

36 NARRATIVE  OF 

manders that have conquered in battle. They 
are clad in brass, with flags in their hands, and 
all their ancient implements of war are deposited 
there. The altar is surrounded by statues of the 
Virgin Mary and the twelve apostles. When 
Russia is at war, and her armies are about to 
engage in battle, it is here that the Emperor and 
his family and court, come to pray for victory 
over the enemy. The day they engaged in bat- 
tle against the Poles, the Empress Dowager took 
her death; she was embalmed and laid in state 
six weeks in the hall of the winter palace. I 
went a number of times to see her, and the peo- 
ple pay her homage, and kiss the hands of that 
lump of clay. All religion is tolerated, but the 
native Russians are subject to the Greek Church. 
There are a number of institutions in St. Peters- 
burg where children of all classes have the privi- 
lege of instruction. The sailors' and soldiers' 
boys enter the corps at the age of seven, and are 
educated for that purpose. The girls remain in 
the barracks with their parents, or go to some 
institution where they are instructed in all the 
branches of female education. There are other 
establishments, where the higher classes send 
their children. 

There is another spacious building called the 
Market, half a mile square, where all kinds of 

MRS.  PRINCE. 37 

articles may be bought. Between the Market 
and the church there is a block of buildings where 
silver articles of all kinds are to be purchased. 
These stores present a very superb appearance 
and are visited by every foreigner that comes 
into the place. Besides these buildings, Main 
Street is lined with elegant buildings with pro- 
jecting windows, to the extent of twelve miles. 
Nearly at the termination of the street there is a 
spacious building of stone which encloses the 
Taberisey Garden, so called from its having every 
kind of tree, shrub, flower and fruit, of the known 
world, which flourish alike in winter as in sum- 
mer. There is an extensive Frozen Market 
which forms a square as large as Boston Com- 
mon. This space of ground is covered with 
counters, on which may be purchased every vari- 
ety of eatable, such as frozen fish, fowl, and meats 
of every description, besides every other article 
of commerce which will bear the extreme cold 
of a St. Petersburg winter. This city was found- 
ed by Peter the Great, and built upon a bog which 
was occupied by a few fishermen's huts, and be- 
longed to the Finns. It is situated at the extrem- 
ity of the Gulf of Finland, and is built partly on 
the main land and partly on several small islands. 
The foundation of the city is extremely marshy, 
which subjects it to frequent  inundations.   For 

38 NARRATIVE  OF 

this reason there are canals which are cut through 
the streets, very beautifully laid out, faced with 
granite, railed with iron chains nubbed with brass, 
with bridges to cross from one street to the other. 
The city houses are built of stone and brick, and 
twice the thickness of American houses. They 
are heated by Peaches, of similar construction to 
our furnaces; the outside of which is faced with 
China tiles, presenting a very beautiful appear- 
ance. The village houses are built of logs corked 
with oakum, where the peasants reside. This 
class of people till the land, most of them are 
slaves and are very degraded. The rich own the 
poor, but they are not suffered to separate fami- 
lies or sell them off the soil. All are subject to 
the Emperor, and no nobleman can leave without 
his permission. The mode of travelling is prin- 
cipally by stages which are built something like 
our omnibusses, with settees upon the top railed 
and guarded by soldiers, for the purpose of pro- 
tecting the travellers from the attacks of wild 
beasts. The common language is a mixture of 
Sclavonian and Polish. The nobility make use 
of the modern Greek, French and English. I 
learned the languages in six months, so as to be 
able to attend to my business, and also made some 
proficiency in the French. My time was taken 
up in domestic affairs; I  took two children to 


MRS.  PRINCE. 39

board, the third week after commencing house- 
keeping, and increased their numbers. The 
baby linen making and childrens' garments were 
in great demand. I started a business in these 
articles and took a journeywoman and apprenti- 
ces. The present Empress is a very active one, 
and inquired of me respecting my business, and 
gave me much encouragement by purchasing of 
me garments for herself and children, handsome- 
ly wrought in French and English styles, and 
many of the nobility also followed her example. 
It was to me a great blessing that we had the 
means of grace afforded us. The Rev. Richard 
Kenell, was the Protestant pastor. We had ser- 
vice twice every Sabbath, and evening prayer 
meetings, also a female society, so that I was 
occupied at all times. 

At the time of the inundation, the Bibles and 
other books belonging to the society were injured. 
But Mr. Kenell took the liberty to purchase at 
full price and sell at an advance. In order that 
the poor might have them, we all agreed to labor 
for that purpose. I often visited the matron of 
the Empress' children, and encouraged by her I 
took some to the Palace, and by this means dis- 
posed of many at head quarters. Other friends 
without the court continued to labor until hun- 
dreds and  thousands were disposed of.   The old 

40 NARRATIVE  OF 

Bishop finding his religion was in danger sent a 
petition to the Emperor that all who were found 
distributing Bibles and Tracts should be punished 
severely. Many were taken and imprisoned, 
two devoted young men were banished; thus the 
righteous were punished, while evil practices 
were not forbidden, for there the sin of licentious- 
ness is very common. 

I have mentioned that the climate did not agree 
with me; in winter my lungs were much affected. 
It was the advice of the best physicians that I had 
better not remain in Russia during another cold 
season. However painful it was to me to return 
without my husband, yet life seemed desirable, 
and he flattered me and himself that he should 
soon follow. It is difficult for any one in the 
Emperor's employment to leave when they 
please. Mr. Prince thought it best for me to re- 
turn to my native country, while he remained 
two years longer to accumulate a little property, 
and then return — but death took him away. I 
left St. Petersburg, August 14th, 1833, having 
been absent about nine years and six months. 
On the 17th, I sailed from Cronstadt, for New 
York. Arrived at Elsinore the 25th. Tuesday, 
29, left. September the 2d, laid to in a gale. 
September 18th, made Plymouth, Old England, 
19th sailed.   Arrived in New York, Oct. 10th. 


MRS.  PRINCE. 41 

Left there Tuesday 18th, arrived in Boston the 
23d. Sabbath, Nov. 9th, I had the privilege of 
attending service in the old place of worship. 
On this day I also had the pleasure of meeting 
with an old friend of my grandfather, nearly one 
hundred years of age. I found things much 
changed; my mother and sister Silvia died in 
1827, (that I was aware of.) The Rev. T. Paul 
was dead, and many of my old friends were gone 
to their long home. The old church and society 
was in much confusion; I attempted to worship 
with them but it was in vain. The voyage was 
of great benefit to me. By the advice of friends 
I applied to a Mrs. Mott, a female physician in 
the city, that helped me much. I am indebted 
to God for his great goodness in guiding my 
youthful steps; my mind was directed to my 
fellow brethren whose circumstances were simi- 
lar to my own. I found many a poor little orphan 
destitute and afflicted, and on account of color 
shut out from all the asylums for poor children. 
At this my heart was moved, and I proposed to 
my friends the necessity of a home for such, 
where they might be sheltered from the contami- 
nating evils that beset their path. For this 
purpose I called a meeting of the people and 
laid before them my plan: as I had had the 
privilege of assisting in forming an Asylum for 

42 NARRATIVE  OF 

such a purpose in St. Petersburg, I thought it 
would be well to establish one on the same princi- 
ples, not knowing that any person had had a 
thought of anything of the kind. We commenc- 
ed with eight children. I gave three months of 
my time. A board was formed of seven females, 
with a committee of twelve gentlemen of stand- 
ing, to superintend. At the end of three months 
the committee was dispensed with, and for want 
of funds our society soon fell through. 

I passed my time in different occupations and 
making arrangements for the return of my hus- 
band, but death took him from me. I made my 
home at the Rev. J. W. Holman's, a Free Will 
Baptist, until I sailed for Jamaica. There had 
been an Anti-Slavery Society established by W. 
L. Garrison, Knapp, and other philanthropists of 
the day. Their design was the amelioration of 
the nominally free colored people of these States, 
and the emancipation of the slaves in other States. 
These meetings I attended with much pleasure, 
until a contention broke out among themselves; 
there has been a great change in some things, 
but much remains to be done; possibly I may 
not see so clearly as some, for the weight of 
prejudice has again oppressed me, and were it 
not for the promises of God, one's heart would 
fail, for He made man in his own image, in the 

MRS.  PRINCE. 43 

image of God, created he him, male and female, 
that they should have dominion over the fish of 
the sea, the fowl of the air, and the beast of the 
field, &c. This power did God give man, that 
thus far should he go and no farther; but man 
has disobeyed his Maker, and become vain in his 
imagination, and their foolish hearts are darkened. 
We gather from this, that God has in all ages of 
the world punished every nation and people for 
their sins. The sins of my beloved country are 
not hid from his notice; his all seeing eye sees 
and knows the secrets of all hearts; the angels 
that kept not their first estate but left their own 
habitations, he hath reserved in everlasting chains 
unto the great day. 

My mind, after the emancipation in the West 
Indies, was bent upon going to Jamaica. A field 
of usefulness seemed spread out before me. 
While I was thinking about it, the Rev. Mr. In- 
graham, who had spent seven years there, ar- 
rived in the city. He lectured in the city at the 
Marlboro' Chapel, on the results arising from the 
emancipation at the British Islands. He knew 
much about them, he had a station at a moun- 
tain near Kingston, and was very desirous to have 
persons go there to labor. He wished some one 
to go with him to his station. He called on 
me with the Rev. Mr.  William  Collier, to  per- 


44 NARRATIVE  OF 

suade me to go. I told him it was my intention 
to go if I could make myself useful, but that I 
was sensible that I was very limited in education. 
He told me that the moral condition of the peo- 
ple was very bad, and needed labor aside from 
any thing else. 

I left America, November 16th, 1840, in the 
ship Scion, Captain Mansfield, bound for Jamaica, 
freighted with ice and machinery for the silk fac- 
tory. There were on board a number of handi- 
craftsmen and other passengers. We sailed on 
Monday afternoon, from Charlestown, Massachu- 
setts. It rained continually until Saturday. Sun- 
day, the 23d, was a fine day. Mr. De Grass, a 
young colored clergyman, was invited to perform 
divine service, which he did with much propriety. 
He spoke of the dangers we had escaped and the 
importance of being prepared to meet our God, 
(he died of fever about three weeks after arriv- 
ing at Jamaica,) some who were able to attend 
came on deck, and listened to him with respect, 
while others seemed to look on in derision; these 
spent the afternoon and evening in card-playing. 
About twelve at night a storm commenced; on 
Monday were in great peril; the storm continued 
until Friday, the 27th. On that day a sail was 
seen at some distance making towards us, the 
captain judging her to be a piratical vessel, or- 

MRS.  PRINCE. 45 

dered the women and children below, and the 
men to prepare for action. The pirates were 
not inclined to hazard an engagement; when 
they saw the deck filled with armed men they 
left us. Thus were we preserved from the storm 
and from the enemy. Sabbath, 29th, divine ser- 
vice,— our attention was directed to the goodness 
of God, in sparing us, 

Monday, and we mortals are still alive. Tues- 
day, thus far the Lord has led us on. Wednes- 
day, thus far his power prolongs our days. 
Thursday, December 3d, to-day made Turks 
Island. Friday, this day had a view of Hayti, 
its lofty mountains presented a sublime prospect. 
Saturday, we had a glance at Cuba. Sunday, 
December 6th, at six o'clock in the evening, 
dropped anchor at St. Ann Harbor, Jamaica. 
We blessed the Lord for his goodness in sparing 
us to see the place of our destination; and here 
I will mention my object in visiting Jamaica. I 
hoped that I might aid, in some small decree, to 
raise up and encourage the emancipated inhabi- 
tants, and teach the young children to read and 
work, to fear God, and put their trust in the 
Saviour. Mr. Whitmarsh and his friend came on 
board and welcomed us. On Tuesday we went 
on shore to see the place and the people; my in- 
tention had been to go directly to Kingston, but 
 

46 NARRATIVE  OF 

the people urged me to stay with them, and I 
thought it my duty to comply, and wrote to Mr. 
Ingraham to that effect. I went first to see the 
minister, Mr. Abbott; I thought as he was out, I 
had better wait his return. The people promised 
to pay me for my services, or send me to King- 
ston. When Mr. Abbott returned he made me 
an offer, which I readily accepted. As I lodged 
in the house of one of the class-leaders I attended 
her class a few times, and when I learned the 
method, I stopped. She then commenced her 
authority and gave me to understand if I did not 
comply I should not have any pay from that so- 
ciety. I spoke to her of the necessity of being 
born of the spirit of God before we become mem- 
bers of the church of Christ, and told her I was 
sorry to see the people blinded in such a way. 

She was very angry with me and soon accom- 
plished her end by complaining of me to the min- 
ister; and I soon found I was to be dismissed, 
unless I would yield obedience to this class-lead- 
er. I told the minister that I did not come there 
to be guided by a poor foolish woman. He then 
told me that I had spoken something about the 
necessity of moral conduct in church members. 
I told him I had, and in my opinion, I was sorry 
to see it so much neglected. He replied, that he 
hoped I would not express myself so except to 

MRS.  PRINCE. 47

him; they have the gospel, he continued, and 
let them into the church. I do not approve of 
women societies; they destroy the world's con- 
vention; the American women have too many of 
them. I talked with him an hour. He paid me 
for the time I had been there. I continued with 
the same opinion, that something must be done 
for the elevation of the children, and it is for that 
I labor. I am sorry to say the meeting house is 
more like a play house than a place of worship. 
The pulpit stands about the middle of the build- 
ing, behind are about six hundred children that 
belong to the society; there they are placed for 
Sabbath School, and there they remain until ser- 
vice is over, playing most of the time. The 
house is crowded with the aged and the young, 
the greater part of them barefooted. Some have 
on bonnets, but most of the women wear straw 
hats such as our countrymen wear. 

I gave several Bibles away, not knowing that 
I was hurting the minister's sale, the people buy 
them of him at a great advance. I gave up my 
school at St. Ann, the 18th of March. I took the 
fever and was obliged to remain until the 7th of 
April. The people of St. Ann fulfilled their 
promise which they made to induce me to stop 
with them. On the 11th of April I arrived at 
Kingston, and was conducted to the Mico Institu- 

48 NARRATIVE  OF 

tion, where Mr. Ingraham directed me to find 
him; he had lost his pulpit and his school, but 
Mr. Venning, the teacher, kindly received me. 
I remained there longer than I expected; the 
next morning he kindly sent one of the young 
men with me to the packet for my baggage. I 
then called on the American Consul, he told me 
he was very glad to see me for such a purpose 
as I had in view in visiting Jamaica, but he said 
it was a folly for the Americans to come to the 
island to better their condition; he said they 
came to him every day praying him to send them 
home. 

He likewise mentioned to me the great mortal- 
ity among the emigrants. The same day I saw 
the Rev. J. S. Beadslee, one of our missionaries, 
who wished me to accompany him forty miles 
into the interior of the country. 

On May the 18th, I attended the Baptist Mis- 
sionary meeting, in Queen Street Chapel; the 
house was crowded. Several ministers spoke of 
the importance of sending the gospel to Africa; 
they complimented the congregation on their lib- 
erality the last year, having given one hundred 
pounds sterling; they hoped this year they would 
give five hundred pounds, as there were five 
thousand members at the present time. There 
was but one colored minister on the platform.   It 

MRS.  PRINCE. 49 

is generally the policy of these missionaries to 
have the sanction of colored ministers, to all their 
assessments and taxes. The colored people give 
more readily, and are less suspicious of imposi- 
tion, if one from themselves recommends the 
measure; this the missionaries understand very 
well, and know how to take advantage of it. 
On the 22d and 23d of June, the colored Bap- 
tists held their missionary meeting, the number 
of ministers, colored and mulattoes, was 18, the 
colored magistrates were present. The resolu- 
tions that were offered were unanimously accept- 
ed, and every thing was done in love and har- 
mony. After taking up a contribution, they con- 
cluded with song and prayer, and returned home 
saying jocosely, " they would turn macroon 
hunters." 

Mack is the name of a small coin in circula- 
tion at Jamaica. I called, on my return, at the 
market, and counted the different stalls. For 
vegetables and poultry 196, all numbered and 
under cover; beside 70 on the ground; these 
are all attended by colored women. The market 
is conveniently arranged, as they can close the 
gates and leave all safe. There are nineteen 
stalls for fresh fish, eighteen for pork, thirty for 
beef, eighteen for turtle. These are all regular 
built markets, and are kept by colored men and 

50 NARRATIVE  OF

women. These are all in one place. Others 
also may be found, as with us, all over the city. 
Thus it may be hoped they are not the stupid set 
of beings they have been called; here surely we 
see industry; they are enterprising and quick in 
their perceptions, determined to possess them- 
selves, and to possess property besides, and quite 
able to take care of themselves. They wished 
to know why I was so inquisitive about them. I 
told them we had heard in America that you are 
lazy, and that emancipation has been of no bene- 
fit to you; I wish to inform myself of the truth 
respecting you, and give a true account on my 
return. Am I right? More than two hundred 
people were around me listening to what I said. 

They thanked me heartily. I gave them some 
tracts, and told them if it so pleased God I would 
come back to them and bring them some more 
books, and try what could be done with some of 
the poor children to make them better. I then 
left them, and went to the East Market, where 
there are many of all nations. The Jews and 
Spanish looked at me very black. The colored 
people gathered around me. I gave them little 
books and tracts, and told them I hoped to see 
them again. 

There are in this street upwards of a thousand 
young women and children, living in sin of every 


MRS.  PRINCE 51 

kind. From thence I went to the jail, where 
there were seventeen men, but no women. There 
were in the House of Correction three hundred 
culprits; they are taken from there, to work on 
plantations. I went to the Admiral's house, 
where the emigrants find a shelter until they can 
find employment, then they work and pay for 
their passage. Many leave their homes and come 
to Jamaica under the impression that they are to 
have their passage free, and on reaching the 
island are to be found, until they can provide for 
themselves. 

How the mistake originated, I am not able to 
say, but on arriving here, strangers poor and un- 
acclimated, find the debt for passage money hard 
and unexpected. It is remarkable that whether 
fresh from Africa, or from other islands, from the 
South or from New England, they all feel de- 
ceived on this point. I called on many Ameri- 
cans and found them poor and discontented, — 
rueing the day they left their country, where, 
notwithstanding many obstacles, their parents 
lived and died, — a country they helped to conquer 
with their toil and blood; now shall their children 
stray abroad and starve in foreign lands. 

There is in Jamaica an institution, established 
in 1836, called the Mico Institution. It is named 
after its founder, Madame Mico, who left a large 


52 NARRATIVE  OF 

sum of money to purchase, (or rather to ransom, 
the one being a Christian act, the other a sin 
against the Holy Ghost, who expressly forbids 
such traffic.) Madame Mico left this money to 
ransom the English who were in bondage to the 
Algerines; if there was any left, it was to be 
devoted to the instruction of the colored people in 
the British Isles. 

Beside the Mico establishment, there are in 
Jamaica twenty-seven church missionary schools, 
where children are taught gratis. Whole num- 
ber taught, 952. London Missionary Society 
Schools, sixteen; the number taught not ascer- 
tained. National Schools, thirty-eight. There 
are also the Wesleyan, Presbyterian and Mora- 
vian Schools; it is supposed there are private 
schools, where three or four thousand are edu- 
cated in the city of Kingston, and twice the num- 
ber in the street without the means of instruction. 
All the children and adults taught in the above 
named schools, are taxed £1 a year, except the 
English Church School, this is the most liberal. 
The Rev. Mr. Horton, a Baptist minister in Kings- 
ton, told me he had sent ninety children away 
from the Baptist school because they did not 
bring their money. It is sufficient to say they 
had it not to bring!
Most of the people of Jamaica are emancipated 

MRS.  PRINCE. 53 

slaves, many of them are old, worn out and de- 
graded. Those who are able to work, have yet 
many obstacles to contend with, and very little to 
encourage them; every advantage is taken of 
their ignorance; the same spirit of cruelty is op- 
posed to them that held them for centuries in bond- 
age; even religious teaching is bartered for their 
hard earnings, while they are allowed but thirty- 
three cents a day, and are told if they will not 
work for that they shall not work at all; an ex- 
traordinary price is asked of them for every thing 
they may wish to purchase, even the Bibles are 
sold to them at a large advance on the first pur- 
chase. Where are their apologists, if they are 
found wanting in the strict morals that Christians 
ought to practice? Who kindly says, forgive 
them when they err. "Forgive them, this is the 
bitter fruit of slavery." Who has integrity suffi- 
cient to hold the balance when these poor people 
are to be weighed? Yet their present state is 
blissful, compared with slavery. 

Many of the farmers bring their produce twen- 
ty or thirty miles. Some have horses or ponys, 
but most of them bring their burdens on their 
head. As I returned from St. Andrew's Moun- 
tain, where I had been sent for by a Mr. Rose, I 
was overtaken by a respectable looking man on 
horseback; we rode about ten miles in company. 

54 NARRATIVE OF 

The story he told me of the wrongs he and his 
wife had endured while in slavery, are too horrible 
to narrate. My heart sickens when I think of it. 
He asked me many questions, such as where I 
came from? why I came to that Isle? where 
had I lived, &c. I told him I was sent for by 
one of the missionaries to help him in his school. 
Indeed, said he, our color need the instruction. 
I asked him why the colored people did not hire 
for themselves ? We would be very glad to, he 
replied, but our money is taken from us so fast 
we cannot. Sometimes they say we must all 
bring 1£; to raise this, we have to sell at a loss 
or to borrow, so that we have nothing left for 
ourselves; the Macroon hunters take all — this is 
a nickname they give the missionaries and the 
class-leaders — a cutting sarcasm this! 

Arrived at a tavern, about a mile from Kings- 
ton, I bade the man adieu, and stopped for my 
guide. The inn-keeper kindly invited me in; 
he asked me several questions, and I asked him 
as many. How do the people get along, said I, 
since the emancipation? The negroes, he re- 
plied, will have the island in spite of the d--. 

Do not you see how they live, and how much 
they can bear? We cannot do so. This man 
was an Englishman, with a large family of mu- 
latto children. I returned with my mind fully 

MRS.  PRINCE. 55 

made up what to do. Spent three weeks at the 
Mico establishment, and three with my colored 
friends from America. We thought something 
ought to be done for the poor girls that were des- 
titute; they consulted with their friends, called a 
meeting, and formed a society of forty; each 
agreed to pay three dollars a year and collect, 
and provide a house, while I came back to Ameri- 
ica to raise the money for all needful articles for 
the school. Here I met Mr. Ingraham for the 
first time; he had come from the mountains, and 
his health had rapidly declined. Wishing to get 
his family home before the Lord took him away, 
he embarked for Baltimore in the Orb, and I sailed 
for Philadelphia, July 20th, 1841, twenty-one 
days from Jamaica, in good health. I found 
there, Fitz W. Sargent's family, from Gloucester, 
who I lived with when a little girl; they received 
me very kindly, and gave donations of books and 
money for that object. 

I met the Anti Slavery Society at Mrs. Lucretia 
Motts, who took great interest in the cause. I vis- 
ited among the friends, and spent my time very 
pleasantly. August 5th, I started for New York; 
arrived safely, and staid with an old friend; as- 
certained that Mr. Ingraham's family were at 
Newark, at Theodore Wells'. He died four days 
after his arrival.  I was invited  to Mrs. Ingra- 

56 NARRATIVE  OF 

ham's, (his cousin's widow) to spend a week. 
There I met with much encouragement to labor 
in the cause. Missionaries were coming and go- 
ing, and all seemed to be interested in my object. 
Saturday evening I went to the bath room, where 
I left my neck ribbon: returning after it, I had 
the misfortune to fall through an open trap door, 
down fifteen feet, on hard coal. I had no light 
with me. I dislocated my left shoulder, and 
was generally very much bruised; my screams 
brought the girl to my assistance, and by the help 
of God she brought me out of the cellar; it was 
some time before a surgeon could be procured; at 
last Dr. Josselyn came to my relief, and set my 
shoulder. I was obliged to remain at Mrs. Ingra- 
ham's three weeks; as soon as I was able, I left 
there for Boston. I intended to have gone by 
the western boat, but by mistake got on board 
Captain Comstock's, and was exposed on deck all 
night in a damp east wind, and when I arrived at 
the landing I could not assist myself; a sailor, 
who saw and pitied my situation, kindly took care 
of me and my baggage, and, on my arrival in 
Boston, procured a carriage for me. If it had 
not been for his kindness, I know not how I should 
have got along. 
As soon as I was able, I commenced my task 
of collecting funds for my Free Labor School in 

MRS.  PRINCE. 57 

Jamaica. I collected in Boston and vicinity, in 
New York and Philadelphia, but not sufficient to 
make up the required sum, and I was obliged to 
take fifty dollars from my own purse, thinking 
that when I returned to Jamaica, they would re- 
fund the money to me. April 15th, embarked 
on board the brig Norma, of New York, for Ja- 
maica. I arrived at Kingston May 6th, and found 
every thing different from what it was when I left; 
the people were in a state of agitation, several 
were hanged, and the insurrection was so great 
that it was found necessary to increase the army 
to quell it. Several had been hanged. On the 
very day I arrived a man was hanged for shooting 
a man as he passed through the street. Such was 
the state of things that it was not safe to be there. 
A few young people met to celebrate their free- 
dom on an open plain, where they hold their mar- 
ket; their former masters and mistresses, envious 
of their happiness, conspired against them, and 
thought to put them down by violence. This only 
served to increase their numbers; but the oppres- 
sors were powerful, and succeeded in accom- 
plishing their revenge, although many of them 
were relations. There was a rule among the 
slave holders, to take care of the children they 
have by their slaves; they select them out and 
place them in asylums. Those who lived with 

58 NARRATIVE  OF 

their white fathers were allowed great power over 
their slave mothers and her slave children; my 
heart was often grieved to see their conduct to 
their poor old grand parents. Those over twenty- 
one were freed in 1834, all under twenty-one were 
to serve their masters till twenty-one. It is. well 
known that at that time, the children, alike with 
others, received twenty-five dollars a head for 
their relatives. Were I to tell all my eyes have 
seen among that people, it would not be credited. 
It is well known that those that were freed, know- 
ing their children were still in bondage, were not 
satisfied. In the year 1838, general freedom 
throughout the British Islands gave the death blow 
to the power of the master, and mothers received 
with joy their emancipated children; they no 
longer looked the picture of despair, fearing to 
see their mulatto son or daughter beating or abu- 
sing their younger brothers and sisters of a darker 
skin. On this occasion there was an outrage com- 
mitted by those who were in power. What little 
the poor colored people had gathered during their 
four years of freedom, was destroyed by violence; 
their fences were broken down, and their horses 
and hogs taken from them. Most of the mulat- 
toes and masters are educated, many of them are 
very poor, some are very rich; the property is 
left to the oldest daughter, she divides it with her 

MRS.  PRINCE. 59 

brothers and sisters; since slavery ended many 
of them have married; those who are poor, and 
mean to live in sin, make for New Orleans and 
other slave States; many of the planters left the 
island when slavery was abolished. In June, 1841, 
a number of people arrived from Sierra Leone at 
Jamaica; these were Maroons who were banished 
from the island. They were some of the original 
natives who inhabited the mountains, and were 
determined to destroy the whites. These Maroons 
would secrete themselves in trees, and arrest the 
whites as they passed along; they would pretend 
to guide them, when they would beat and abuse 
them as the whites did their slaves; the English, 
finding themselves defeated in all their plans to 
subdue them, proposed to take them by craft. 
They made a feast in a large tavern in Kingston, 
and invited them to come. After they had eaten, 
they were invited on board three ships of war that 
were all ready to set sail for Sierra Leone; many 
of them were infants in their mother's arms, 
they were well taken care of by the English and 
instructed; they were removed about the year 
1796 — they are bright and intelligent; I saw and 
conversed with them; when they heard of the 
abolition of slavery, they sent a petition to Queen 
Victoria that they might return to Jamaica, which 
was granted.   Several of them were very old 

60 NARRATIVE  OF 

when they returned; they were men and women 
when they left the island, they had not forgot the 
injuries they had received from the hands of man, 
nor the mercies of God to them, nor his judg- 
ments to their enemies. Their numbers were few, 
but their power was great; they say the island, 
of right, belongs to them. Had there been a ves- 
sel in readiness, I should have come back imme- 
diately, it seemed useless to attempt to establish a 
Manual Labor School, as the government was so 
unsettled that I could not be protected. Some of 
my former friends were gone as teachers to Africa, 
and some to other parts of the island. I called 
on the American Consul to consult with him, he 
said that although such a school was much want- 
ed, yet every thing seemed so unsettled that I 
had no courage to proceed. I told him there was 
so much excitement that I wished to leave the 
island as soon as he could find me a passage, it 
seemed useless to spend my time there. As soon 
as it was known that I intended to return, a move- 
ment was made to induce me to remain. I was 
persuaded to try the experiment for three months, 
not thinking their motive was bad. Before I left 
the United States, I got all that was needed, with- 
in fifty dollars. The fifty dollars I got from my 
own purse., expecting they would pay me. It cost 
me ten dollars for freight, and twenty-five for pas- 

MRS. PRINCE. 61 

sage money; these people that I had hoped to 
serve, were much taken up with the things I had 
brought, they thought that I had money, and I 
was continually surrounded; the thought of color 
was no where exhibited, much notice was taken 
of me. I was invited to breakfast in one place, 
and to dine in another, &c. A society was or- 
ganized, made up of men and women of authority. 
A constitution was drafted by my consent, by 
those who were appointed to meet at my rooms. 
Between the time of the adjournment they altered 
it to suit themselves. At the time appointed we 
came together with a spirit apparently becoming 
any body of Christians; most of them were mem- 
bers of Christian churches. The meeting was 
opened with reading the Scriptures and prayer. 
Then said the leader, since our dear sister has left 
her native land and her friends to come to us, we 
welcome her with our hearts and hands. She will 
dwell among us, and we will take care of her — 
Brethren think of it ! after which he sat down, and 
the constitution was called for. The Preamble 
held out all the flattery that a fool could desire; 
after which they commenced the articles, suppo- 
sing that they could do as they thought best. The 
fourth article unveiled their design. As we have 
designed to take care of our sister, we the under- 
signed will take charge of all she has brought; 

62 NARRATIVE  OF 

the vote was called, every person rose in a mo- 
ment except myself: every eye was upon me; 
one asked me why I did not vote, I made no an- 
swer— they put the vote again and again, I re- 
mained seated. Well, said the President, we can 
do nothing without her vote; they remained some 
time silent, and then broke up the meeting. The 
next day the deacon called to see what the state 
of my mind was, and some of the women pro- 
posed that we should have another meeting. I 
told them no, I should do no more for them. As 
soon as they found they could not get the things 
in the way they intended, they started to plunder 
me; but I detected their design, and was on my 
guard. I disposed of the articles, and made ready 
to leave when an opportunity presented. A more 
skilful plan than this, Satan never designed, but the 
power of God was above it. It is not surprising 
that this people are full of deceit and lies, this is 
the fruits of slavery, it makes master and slaves 
knaves. It is the rule where slavery exists to 
swell the churches with numbers, and hold out 
such doctrines as, obedience to tyrants is a duty 
to God. I went with a Baptist woman to the house 
of a minister of the Church of England, to have 
her grandchild christened before it died; she told 
me if she did not have it christened, it would rise 
up in judgment against her.  This poor deluded 

MRS.  PRINCE 63 

creature was a class leader in the Baptist Church, 
and such is the condition of most of the people: 
they seemed blinded to every thing but money. 
They are great for trade, and are united in their 
determination for procuring property, of which 
they have amassed a vast amount. Notwithstand- 
ing I had made over various articles to one of the 
American missionaries, a Mr. J. S. 0. Beadslee, of 
Clarendon Mountains, I also gave to others, where 
they were needed, which receipts and letters I 
have in my possession. Notwithstanding all this, 
they made another attempt to rob me, and as a pas- 
sage could not be obtained for me to return home, 
I was obliged to go to the Mico establishment again 
for safety, such was the outrage. Houses were 
broken open and robbed every night. I came 
very near being shot: there was a certain place 
where we placed ourselves the first of the even- 
ing. A friend came to bring us some refresh- 
ments, I had just left the window when a gun was 
fired through it, by one that often sat with us; 
this was common in the time of slavery. Pre- 
vious to vessels arriving, passages were engaged. 
I disposed of my articles and furniture at a very 
small profit. On the 1st of August, Capt. A. Mi- 
ner arrived, and advertised for passengers. The 
American Consul procured me a passage, and on 

64 NARRATIVE  OF 

the 18th of August, myself and nine other pas- 
sengers embarked for New York. 

Before giving an account of the voyage from 
Jamaica, it may prove interesting to some rea- 
ders, to have a brief description of the country. 
With her liberty secured to her, may she now 
rise in prosperity, morality, and religion, and be- 
come a happy people, whose God is the Lord. 

		WEST INDIES.

A denomination under which is comprehended 
a large chain of islands, extending in a curve 
from the Florida shore on the northern peninsula 
of America, to the Gulf of Venezuela on the 
southern. These islands belong to five European 
powers, viz : Great Britain, Spain, France, Hol- 
land, and Denmark. An inhabitant of New 
England can form no idea of the climate and 
the productions of these islands. Many of the 
particulars that are here mentioned, are peculiar 
to them all. 

The climate in all the West India Islands is 
nearly the same, allowing for those accidental 
differences which the several situations and quali- 
ties of the lands themselves produce; as they lie 
within the tropic of Cancer, and the sun is often 
almost at the meridian over their heads, they are 
continually subjected to a heat  that would be

MRS.  PRINCE. 65 

intolerable but for the trade winds, which are so 
refreshing as to enable the inhabitants to attend 
to their various occupations, even under a noon- 
day sun; as the night advances, a breeze begins 
to be perceived, which blows smartly from the 
land, as it were from the centre towards the sea, 
to all points of the compass at once. The rains 
make the only distinction of seasons on these 
islands. The trees are green the year round; 
they have no cold or frost; our heaviest rains are 
but dews comparatively; with them floods of 
water are poured from the clouds. About May, 
the periodical rains from the South may be 
expected. Then the tropical summer, in all its 
splendor, makes its appearance. The nights are 
calm and serene, the moon shines more brightly 
than in New England, as do the planets and the 
beautiful galaxy. From the middle of August to 
the end of September the heat is most oppressive, 
the sea breeze is interrupted, and calms warn the 
inhabitants of the periodical rains, which fall in 
torrents about the first of October. 

The most considerable and valuable of the 
British West India Islands, lies between the 75th 
and the 79th degrees of west longitude from 
London, and between 17 and 18 north latitude; 
it is of an oval figure, 150 miles long from east 
to west, and sixty miles broad in the middle, 

66 NARRATIVE  OF 

containing 4,080,000 acres. An elevated ridge, 
called the Blue Mountains, runs lengthwise 
from east to west, whence numerous rivers 
take their rise on both sides. The year is divi- 
ded into two seasons, wet and dry. The months 
of July, August, and September, are called the 
hurricane months. The best houses are gene- 
rally built low, on account of the hurricanes and 
earthquakes. However pleasant the sun may 
rise, in a moment the scene may be changed; a 
violent storm will suddenly arise, attended with 
thunder and lightning; the rain falls in torrents, 
and the seas and rivers rise with terrible destruc- 
tion. I witnessed this awful scene in June last, 
at Kingston, the capital of Jamaica; the founda- 
tions of many houses were destroyed; the waters, 
as they rushed from the mountains, brought with 
them the produce of the earth, large branches 
of trees, together with their fruit; many persons 
were drowned, endeavoring to reach their homes; 
those who succeeded, were often obliged to travel 
many miles out of their usual way. Many young 
children, without a parent's care, were at this 
time destroyed. A poor old woman, speaking 
of these calamities to me, thus expressed 
herself: "Not so bad now as in the time of 
slavery; then God spoke very loud to Bucker 
(the white people,) to let us go.  Thank God, 

MRS.  PRINCE. 67 

ever since that they give us up, we go pray, and 
we have it not so bad like as before." I would 
recommend this poor woman's remark to the fair 
sons and daughters of America, the land of the 
pilgrims. "Then God spoke very loud." May 
these words be engraved on the post of every 
door in this land of New England. God speaks 
very loud, and while his judgments are on the 
earth, may the inhabitants learn righteousness! 

The mountains that intersect this island, seem 
composed of rocks, thrown up by frequent earth- 
quakes or volcanoes. These rocks, though hav- 
ing little soil, are adorned with a great variety 
of beautiful trees, growing from the fissues, 
which are nourished by frequent rains, and 
flourish in perpetual spring. From these moun- 
tains flow a vast number of small rivers of pure . 
water, which sometimes fall in cataracts, from 
stupendous heights; these, with the brilliant ver- 
dure of the trees, form a most delightful land- 
scape. Ridges of smaller mountains are on each 
side of this great chain; on these, coffee grows 
in great abundance; the valleys or plains between 
these ridges, are level beyond what is usually 
found in similar situations. The highest land in 
the island is Blue Mountain Peak, 7150 feet above 
the sea. The most extensive plain is thirty miles 
long and five broad. Black River, in the Parish 

68 NARRATIVE  OF 

of St. Elizabeth, is the only one navigable; flat- 
boats bring down produce from plantations about 
thirty miles up the river. Along the coast, and 
on the plains, the weather is very hot; but in the 
mountains the air is pure and wholesome; the 
longest days in summer are about thirteen hours, 
and the shortest in winter about eleven. In the 
plains are found several salt fountains, and in the 
mountains, not far from Spanish Town, is a hot 
bath of great medicinal virtues; this gives relief 
in the complaint called the dry-bowels malady, 
which, excepting the bilious and yellow fevers, is 
one of the most terrible distempers of Jamaica. 
The general produce of this island is sugar, rum, 
molasses, ginger, cotton, indigo, pimento, cocoa, 
coffees, several kinds of woods, and medicinal 
drugs. Fruits are in great plenty, as oranges, 
lemons, shaddoks, citrons, pomegranates, pine- 
apples, melons, pompions, guavas, and many 
others. Here are trees whose wood, when dry, 
is incorruptible; here is found the wild cinnamon 
tree, the mahogany, the cabbage, the palm, 
yielding an oil much esteemed for food and 
medicine. Here, too, is the soap tree, whose 
berries are useful in washing. The plantain is 
produced in Jamaica in abundance, and is one 
the most agreeable and nutritious vegetables 
in the world : it grows about four feet in height. 

MRS.  PRINCE 69 

and the fruit grows in clusters, which is filled 
with a luscious sweet pulp. The Banana is very- 
similar to the plantain, but not so sweet. The 
whole island is divided into three counties, Mid- 
dlesex, Surry, and Cornwall, and these into six 
towns, twenty parishes, and twenty-seven villages. 
This island was originally part of the Spanish 
Empire in America, but it was taken by the 
English in 1656. Cromwell had fitted out a 
squadron under Penn and Venables, to reduce 
the Spanish Island of Hispaniola; but there this 
squadron was unsuccessful, and the commanders, 
of their own accord, to atone for this misfortune, 
made a descent on Jamaica, and having arrived 
at St. Jago, soon compelled the whole island to 
surrender. 
Ever since, it has been subject to the English; 
and the government, next to that of Ireland, is 
the richest in the disposal of the crown. Port 
Royal was formerly the capital of Jamaica; it 
stood upon the point of a narrow neck of land, 
which, towards the sea, forms part of the border 
of a very fine harbor of its own name. The con- 
veniences of this harbor, which was capable 
of containing a thousand sail of large ships, and 
of such depth as to allow them to load and unload 
with the greatest ease, weighed so much with the 
inhabitants, that they chose to build their capital  

70 NARRATIVE  OF 

on this spot, although the place was a hot, dry 
sand, and produced none of the necessaries of 
life, not even fresh water. About the beginning 
of the year 1692, no place for its size could be 
compared to this town for trade, wealth, and an 
entire corruption of manners. In the month of 
June in this year, an earthquake which shook 
the whole island to the foundation, totally over- 
whelmed this city, so as to leave, in one quarter, 
not even the smallest vestige remaining. In two 
minutes the earth opened and swallowed up nine- 
tenths of the houses, and two thousand people. 
The waters gushed out from the openings of the 
earth, and the people lay as it were in heaps: some 
of them had the good fortune to catch hold 
of beams and rafters of houses, and were after- 
wards saved by boats. Several ships were cast 
away in the harbor, and the Swan Frigate, which 
lay in the Dock, was carried over the tops of 
sinking houses, and did not overset, but afforded 
a retreat to some hundreds of people, who saved 
their lives upon her. An officer who was in the 
town at that time, says the earth opened and shut 
very quick in some places, and he saw several 
people sink down to the middle, and others ap- 
peared with their heads just above ground, and 
were choked to death. At Savannah above a 
thousand acres were sunk, with the houses and 

MRS.  PRINCE 71 

people in them, the place appearing, for some 
time, like a lake; this was afterwards dried up, 
but no houses were seen. In some parts moun- 
tains were split, and at one place a plantation 
was removed to the distance of a mile. The 
inhabitants again rebuilt the city, but it was a 
second time, ten years after, destroyed by a great 
fire. The extraordinary convenience of the har- 
bor tempted them to build it once more, and in 
1722 it was laid in ruins by a hurricane, the 
most terrible on record. 

Such repeated calamities seemed to mark out 
this spot as a devoted place; the inhabitants, 
therefore, resolved to forsake it forever, and to 
reside at the opposite bay, where they built 
Kingston, which is now the capital of the island. 
In going up to Kingston, we pass over a part 
of and between Port Royal, leaving the moun- 
tains on the left, and a small town on the right. 
There are many handsome houses built there, one 
story high, with particos, and every convenience 
for those who inhabit them. Not far from King- 
ston stands Spanish Town, which, though at 
present far inferior to Kingston, was once the 
capital of Jamaica, and is still the seat of gov- 
ernment. 

On the 3d  of October,  1780,  there was a 
dreadful hurricane, which overwhelmed the little 

72 NARRATIVE OF 

seaport town of Savannah, in Jamaica, and part 
of the adjacent country; very few houses were 
left standing, and a great number of lives were 
lost; much damage was done also, and many 
lives lost, in other parts of the island. 

In January, 1823, a society was formed in 
London for mitigating and gradually abolishing 
slavery, throughout the British dominions, called 
the Anti-Slavery Society. His Royal Highness 
the Duke of Gloucester, was President of the 
Society; in the list of Vice Presidents are the 
names of many of the most distinguished phi- 
lanthropists of the day, and among them that 
of the never to be forgotten Mr. Wilberforce; as 
a bold champion, we see him going forward, 
pleading the cause of our down-trodden brethren. 
In the year 1834, it pleased God to break the 
chains from 800,000 human beings, that had 
been held in a state of personal slavery; and 
this great event was effected through the instru- 
mentality of Clarkson, Wilberforce, and other 
philanthropists of the day. 

The population of Jamaica is nearly 400,000; 
that of Kingston, the capital, 40,000. There are 
many places of worship of various denomina- 
tions, namely, Church of England, and of Scot- 
land, Wesleyan, the Baptist, and Roman Cath- 
olics, besides a Jewish Synagogue.   These all 

MRS.  PRINCE 73 

differ from what I have seen in New England, 
and from those I have seen elsewhere. The 
Baptist hold what they call class-meetings. They 
have men and women deacons and deaconesses 
in these churches; these hold separate class- 
meetings; some of these can read, and some 
cannot. Such are the persons who hold the 
office of judges, and go round and urge the 
people to come to the class, and after they come 
in twice or three times, they are considered can- 
didates for baptism. Some pay fifty cents, and 
some more, for being baptized; they receive a 
ticket as a passport into the church, paying one 
mark a quarter, or more, and some less, but 
nothing short of ten pence, that is, two English 
shillings a year. They must attend their class 
once a week, and pay three pence a week, total 
twelve English shillings a year, besides the sums 
they pay once a month at communion, after 
service in the morning. On those occasions the 
minister retires, and the deacons examine the 
people, to ascertain if each one has brought a 
ticket; if not, they cannot commune; after this 
the minister returns, and performs the ceremony, 
then they give their money and depart. The 
churches are very large, holding from four to six 
thousand; many bring wood and other presents 
to their class-leader, as a token of their attach- 

74 NARRATIVE  OF 

ment; where there are so many communicants, 
these presents, and the money exacted, greatly 
enrich these establishments. Communicants are 
so ignorant of the ordinance, that they join the 
church merely to have a decent burial; for if 
they are not members, none will follow them to 
the grave, and no prayers will be said over them; 
these are borne through the streets by four men, 
the coffin a rough box; not so if they are church 
members; as soon as the news is spread that one 
is dying, all the class, with their leader, will 
assemble at the place, and join in singing hymns; 
this, they say, is to help the spirit up to glory;, 
this exercise sometimes continues all night, in so 
loud a strain, that it is seldom that any of the 
people in the neighborhood are lost in sleep. 

After leaving Jamaica, the vessel was tacked 
to a south-west course. I asked the Captain 
what this meant. He said he must take the cur- 
rent as there was no wind. Without any cere- 
mony, I told him it was not the case, and told the 
passengers that he had deceived us. There 
were two English men that were born on the 
island, that had never been on the water. Before 
the third day passed, they asked the Captain 
why they had not seen Hayti. He told them 
they passed when they were asleep, I told them 
it was not true, he was steering south south-west. 


MRS.  PRINCE. 75 

The passengers in the steerage got alarmed, and 
every one was asking the Captain what this 
meant.   The ninth day we made land, " By 
---," said the Captain, "this  is  Key  West; 
come, passengers, let us have a vote to run over 
the neck, and I will go ashore and bring aboard 
fruit and turtle." They all agreed but myself. 
He soon dropped anchor. The officers from the 
shore came on board and congratulated him on 
keeping his appointment, thus proving that my 
suspicions were well founded. The Captain went 
ashore with these men, and soon came back, 
called for the passengers, and asked for their 
vote for him to remain until the next day, saying 
that he could by this delay, make five or six 
hundred dollars, as there had been a vessel 
wrecked there lately. They all agreed but 
myself. The vessel was soon at the side of the 
wharf In an hour there were twenty slaves at 
work to unload her; every inducement was made 
to persuade me to go ashore, or set my feet on 
the wharf.  A law had just been passed there that 
every free colored person coming there, should 
be put in custody on their going ashore; there 
were five colored persons on board; none dared 
to go ashore, however uncomfortable we might 
be in the vessel, or however we might desire to 
refresh ourselves by a change of scene. We 
remained at Key West four days. 

76 NARRATIVE  OF 

September 3d, we set sail for New York, at 3 
o'clock in the afternoon. At 10 o'clock a gale 
took us, that continued thirty-six hours; my 
state-room was filled with water, and my baggage 
all upset; a woman, with her little boy, and 
myself, were seated on a trunk thirty-six hours, 
with our feet pressed against a barrel to prevent 
falling; the water pouring over us at every brea- 
ker. Wednesday, the 9th, the sun shone out so 
that the Captain could take an observation. He 
found himself in great peril, near the coast of 
Texas. All hands were employed in pumping 
and bailing. On the eleventh, the New Orleans 
steamer came to our assistance; as we passed up 
the river, I was made to forget my own condition,
as I looked with pity on the poor slaves, who 
were laboring and toiling, on either side, as far 
as could be seen with a glass. We soon reached 
the dock, and we were there on the old wreck a 
spectacle for observation; the whites went on 
shore and made themselves comfortable, while 
we poor blacks were obliged to remain on that 
broken, wet vessel. The people were very busy 
about me; one man asked me who I belonged 
to, and many other rude questions; he asked me 
where I was born; I told him Newburyport. 
"What were your parents' names? " I told him 
my  father's  name was Thomas Gardner; his 

MRS.  PRINCE. 77 

countenance changed; said he, "I knew him 
well;" and he proved friendly to me. He ap- 
peared very kind, and offered to arrange my 
affairs so that I might return to New York 
through the States. I thought it best to decline 
his proposal, knowing my spirit would not suffer 
me to pass on, and see my fellow-creatures suffer- 
ing without a rebuke. We remained four days 
on the wreck; the boxes that contained the sugar 
were taken out; the two bottom tiers were washed 
out clean. There were a great many people that 
came to see the vessel; they were astonished that 
she did not sink; they watched me very closely. 
I asked them what they wished. In the mean 
time, there came along a drove of colored people, 
fettered together in pairs by the wrist; some had 
weights, with long chains at their ankles, men and 
women, young and old. I asked them what that 
meant. They were all ready to answer. Said 
they, " these negroes have been impudent, and 
have stolen; some of them are free negroes from 
the northern ships; " " and what," I asked " are 
they there for?" "For being on shore, some of 
them at night." I asked them who made them 
Lord over God's inheritance. They told me I was 
very foolish; they should think I had suffered 
enough to think of myself. I looked pretty bad, 
it is true; I was seated on a box, but poorly dress- 

78 NARRATIVE  OF 

ed; the mate had taken my clothes to a washer- 
woman; why he took this care, he was afraid to 
send the cook or steward on shore, as they were 
colored people. I kept still; but the other woman 
seemed to be in perfect despair, running up and 
down the deck, wringing her hands and crying, at 
the thought of all her clothes being destroyed; 
then her mind dwelt upon other things, and she 
seemed as if she were deranged; she took their 
attention for a few minutes, as she was white. 
Soon the washer-woman came with my clothes; 
they spoke to her as if she had been a dog. I 
looked at them with as much astonishment as 
if I had never heard of such a thing. I 
asked them if they believed there was a God. 
"Of course we do," they replied. "Then why 
not obey him ?" " We do." " You do not; 
permit me to say there is a God, and a just one, 
that will bring you all to account." " For what?" 
"For suffering these men that have just come in 
to be taken out of these vessels, and that awful 
sight I see in the streets." " O that is nothing; 
I should think you would be concerned about 
yourself." " I am sure," I replied, "the Lord 
will take care of me; you cannot harm me." 
"No; we do not wish to; we do not want you 
here." Every ship that comes in, the colored 
men are dragged to prison.   I found it necessary 


MRS.  PRINCE 79 

to be stern with them; they were very rude; if I 
had not been so, I know not what would have been 
the consequences. They went off for that day; 
the next day some of them came again. "Good 
morning," said they; "we shall watch you like 
the d--- until you go away; you must not say 
any thing to these negroes whilst you are here." 
''Why, then, do you talk to me, if you do not 
want me to say any thing to you? If you will let 
me alone, I will you." " Let me see your pro- 
tection," they replied, "they say it is under the 
Russian government." I pointed them to the 18th 
chapter of Revelations and 15th verse: "The 
merchants of these things which were made rich 
by her, shall stand afar off, for the fear of her tor- 
ment, weeping and wailing. For strong is the 
Lord God who judgeth her." They made no an- 
swer, but asked the Captain how soon he should 
get away. 

On the 17th, the Captain put eight of us on 
board the bark H. W. Tyler, for New York; we 
had about a mile to walk; the Captain was in 
honor bound to return us our passage money, 
which we had paid him at Jamaica; he came 
without it to see if we were there, and went away 
saying he would soon return with it; but we saw 
no more of him or our money! Our bark, and a 
vessel loaded with slaves, were towed down the 

80 NARRATIVE  OF 

river by the same steamer; we dropped anchor at 
the bottom of the bay, as a storm was rising. The 
18th, on Sabbath, it rained all day. Capt. Tyler 
knocked at my door, wishing me to come out; it 
rained hard; the bulwark of the bark was so high 
I could not look over it; he placed something for 
me to stand on, that I might see the awful sight, 
which was the vessel of slaves laying at the side 
of our ship ! the deck was full of young men, girls, 
and children, bound to Texas for sale! Monday, 
the 19th, Capt. Tyler demanded of us to pay him 
for our passage. I had but ten dollars, and was 
determined not to give it; he was very severe with 
all. I told him there were articles enough to pay 
him belonging to me. Those who had nothing, were 
obliged to go back in the steamer. Tuesday, the 
20th, we set sail; the storm was not over. The 
22d the gale took us; we were dismasted, and to 
save sinking, sixty casks of molasses were stove 
in, and holes cut in the bulwarks to let it off. All 
the fowls, pigs, and fresh provisions were lost. 
We were carried seventy-five miles up the bay of 
Mexico. The Captain was determined not to pay 
the steamer for carrying him back to New Orleans, 
and made his way the best he could. 
The 3d of October we arrived again at Key 
West. The Captain got the bark repaired, and 
took on board a number of turtles, and a plenty 

MRS.  PRINCE. 81 

of brandy. Friday, the 7th, set sail for New York; 
the Captain asked me why I  did not go ashore 
when there in the Comet; "had you," said  he, 
"they intended to beat you.   John  and Lucy 
Davenport, of Salem, laid down the first ten dollars 
towards a hundred for that person who should get 
you there."  The Florida laws are about the same 
as those at New Orleans,  He was very talkative: 
wished to know if I saw anything of the Creole's 
crew while at Jamaica,   I told him they were all 
safe, a fine set of young men and women; one 
dear little girl, that was taken from her mother in 
Virginia, I should have taken with me, if I had had 
the money.  He said his brother owned the Cre- 
ole, and some of the slaves were his.   " I never 
owned any; I have followed the sea all my life, 
and can tell every port and town in your State." 
October 19th, 1842, arrived at New York, and 
thankful was I to set  my feet on land, almost 
famished for the want of food; we lost all of our 
provisions; nothing was left but sailors' beef, and 
that was tainted before it was salted.  I went at 
once to those who professed to be friends, but 
found myself mistaken.  I hardly knew what was 
best.  I had  put up at  Mrs. Rawes';  she  did 
all she could to raise the twenty-five dollars that I 
must pay before I could take my baggage from 
the vessel. This seemed hard to obtain; I travel- 
 
62 NARRATIVE OF 

led from one to another for three days; at last I 
called at the Second Advent office; Mr. Nath'l 
Southard left his business at once, and took me to 
Mr. Lewis Tappan, and others; he raised the 
money, and went with me to the ship after my 
baggage. It was three o'clock on Saturday after- 
noon when I called on Mr. Southard; the vessel 
and Captain belonged to Virginia, was all ready 
for sea, waiting for a wind; they had ransacked 
my things. I took from Jamaica forty dollars' 
worth of preserved fruits; part were lost when we 
were cast away in the Comet, and some they had 
stolen. At 8 o'clock on Saturday evening, I made 
out to have my things landed on the wharf; it was 
very dark, as it rained hard. My kind friend did 
not leave me until they were all safely lodged at 
my residence. I boarded there three weeks, 
thinking to come home; but it was thought best 
for me to wait, and see if Capt. Miner came or 
not, hoping that I might recover my loss through 
him. I took a room, and went to sewing, and 
found the people very kind. 

February, 1843, the colored men that went back 
to New Orleans, for the want of passage money, 
arrived at New York, wearied out. All the white 
people remained there. I waited in New York 
until the last of July, when I started for Boston, 
August 1st, 1843, arrived, poor in health, and 

MRS. PRINCE 83 

poor in purse, having sacrificed both, hoping to 
benefit my fellow creatures. I trust it was accep- 
table to God, who in his providence preserved me 
in perils by land, and perils by sea. 

"God moves in a mysterious way 
His wonders to perform; 
He plants his footsteps on the sea, 
And rides upon the storm. 

"Deep in unfathomable mines 
Of never failing skill, 
He treasures up his bright designs, 
And works his sovereign will." 

Having lost all, I determined, by the help of 
God, to leave the event; some of my friends in 
this city sympathized with me, and others took the 
advantage to reproach me. But in the hands of 
the Lord there is a cup; the Saviour drank it to 
the dregs. They gather themselves together; 
they hide themselves; they mark my steps; they 
waited for my soul, but the Lord is my defence, 
the Holy one of Israel is my Saviour. I'll trust 
him for strength and defence. What things were 
gain to me, I counted loss for Christ, for whom I 
have suffered all things; and do count them no- 
thing, that I may win Christ, and be found in him, 
not having mine own righteousness, which is of the 
law, but that which is through the faith of Christ, 
that which is of God by faith, that I may know 

84 NARRATIVE  OF 

him, and the power of his resurrection, and the 
fellowship of his sufferings, being made conform- 
able unto his death, strengthened with all might, 
according to his glorious power, unto all patience 
and long-suffering, with joyfulness, thinking it not 
strange concerning the fiery trials, as though some 
strange thing happened; for saith the apostle, it is 
better if the will of God so be that ye suffer for 
well doing, than for evil; they think it strange 
that ye run not with them to the same excess of 
riot, speaking evil of you. If they do these things 
in a green tree, what shall be done in a dry! 

"I hate to walk, I hate to sit 

With men of vanity and lies; 
The scoffer and the hypocrite 
Are the abhorrence of my eyes. 

God knows their impious thoughts are vain, 
And they shall feel his power; 
His wrath shall pierce their souls with pain, 
In some surprising hour." 

The first twenty months after my arrival in the 
city, notwithstanding my often infirmities, I labor- 
ed with much success, until I hired with and from 
those with whom I mostly sympathized, and shared 
in common the disadvantages and stigma that is 
heaped upon us, in this our professed Christian 
land. But my lot was like the man that went 
down from Jerusalem, and  fell  among  thieves, 


MRS.  PRINCE. 85 

which stripped him of his raiment, and wounding 
him, departed, leaving him half dead. What I did 
not lose, when cast away, has been taken from 
my room where I hired. Three times I had 
been broken up in business, embarrassed and 
obliged to move, when not able to wait on myself. 
This has been my lot. In the midst of my afflic- 
tions, sometimes I have thought my case like that 
of Paul's, when cast among wild beasts. "Had 
not the Lord been on my side, they would have 
swallowed me up; but blessed be the Lord who 
hath not given me a prey to their teeth." 

In 1848 and '49 the Lord was pleased to lay his 
hand upon me. Some of my friends came to my 
relief; but the promises of God were neither few 
nor small; he knows them that trust and fear him. 
No one has greater reason to be grateful than L 
God has preserved me through much suffering the 
past winter. I have passed through another furnace 
of affliction, and may God's dispensations be sancti- 
fied to me. The sufferings of this present life are 
not worthy to be compared with the glory that shall 
be revealed hereafter. Who shall separate us 
from the love of Christ? Shall tribulation, or dis- 
tress, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or 
peril, or sword? Nay, in all these things we are 
more than conquerors, through him that loved us, 
and gave himself for us. Soon he will come; here 

86 NARRATIVE  OF 

we live by faith; if any one draw back, my soul 
shall have no pleasure in him. 
Truly the promises of God are given for our 
encouragement; they are yea and amen, in Christ 
Jesus; they are a covert from the storm, a shelter 
from the heat, a sure retreat for the weary and 
way worn traveller. 

Many are the trials and temptations to which we 
are exposed in this vale of tears, but in heaven 
we shall be freed from the bondage of sin. No- 
thing can enter there to annoy or molest the re- 
deemed ones : the Captain of our salvation was 
made perfect through suffering; he was despised 
and rejected of men, a man of sorrows, and ac- 
quainted with grief; and that he might sanctify the 
people with his own blood, suffered without the 
gate. Let us go forth, therefore, unto him, bear- 
ing his reproach. Here we have no continuing 
city nor abiding place. 

I have much to be thankful to God for; for the 
comforts of this life, and the kind friends who 
have so kindly bestowed their favors upon me, 
and while they in this life have an abundance, 
may they have the presence of God; and when 
the King shall come, may they have their lamps 
trimmed and burning: then shall he say, "Come 
ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom 
prepared for you  from  the  foundation  of the 


MRS.  PRINCE. 87 

world: for I was an hungered, and ye gave me 
meat, I was thirsty, and ye gave me drink, naked, 
and ye clothed me, sick, and in prison, and ye 
visited me. Then shall the righteous answer, say- 
ing: when saw we thee an hungered, and fed 
thee, and thirsty, and gave thee drink, naked, and 
clothed thee, sick, and in prison, and ministered 
unto thee, or a stranger, and took thee in ? " And 
the King shall answer and say: " Inasmuch as 
ye have done it unto one of the least of my dis- 
ciples, ye have done it unto me. The poorest can 
do something for the cause of Christ; even a cup 
of cold water, given with a desire to benefit a fel- 
low creature, will be acceptable to God. May the 
power of God, and the spirit of Christ rule and 
reign in all hearts. He knoweth them that love 
and trust in him. 

I am a wonder unto many, but the Lord is my 
strong refuge, and in him will I trust. I shall fear 
no evil, for thou, O Lord, art ever near to shield 
and protect thy dependent children. Underneath 
him is the everlasting arm of mercy; misfortune 
is never mournful for the soul that accepts it, for 
such do always see that every cloud is an angel's 
face; sorrow connects the soul with the invisible. 

O Father, fearful indeed is this world's pilgrim- 
age, when the soul has learned that all its sounds 
are echoes, all its sights are shadows.   But lo! a 


88 NARRATIVE  OF 

cloud opens, a face serene and hopeful looks forth 
and saith, "Be thou as a little child, and thus 
shalt thou become a seraph, and bow thyself in 
silent humility and pray, not that afflictions might 
not visit, but be willing to be purified through fire, 
and accept it meekly." 


MRS.  PRINCE. 89 


THE HIDING PLACE. 

Amid this world's tumultuous noise, 
For peace my soul to Jesus flies; 
If I've an interest in his grace, 
I want no other hiding place. 

The world with all its charms is vain, 
Its wealth and honors I disdain: 
All its extensive aims embrace, 
Can ne'er afford a hiding place. 

A guilty, sinful heart is mine, 
Jesus, unbounded love is thine! 
When I behold thy smiling face, 
Tis then I see my hiding place. 

To save, if once my Lord engage, 
The world may laugh, and Satan rage: 
The powers of hell can ne'er erase 
My name from God's own hiding place. 

I'm in a wilderness below, 
Lord, guide me all my journey through, 
Plainly let me thy footsteps trace. 
Which lead to heaven, my hiding place. 

Should dangers thick impede my course, 
O let my soul sustain no loss; 
Help me to run the Christian race, 
And enter safe my hiding place. 

Then with enlarged powers, 
I'll triumph in redeeming love, 
Eternal ages will I praise 
My Lord for such a hiding place. 



